Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Jonathan Lossus. He is
the William H Stanford Distinguished university professor at the,
at Washington University in Saint Louis. And today we're
going to talk about his book Improbable Destinies, Faith,
Chance, and the Future of Evolution. So Doctor Losses,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Ah, the pleasure is mine. Thank you, Ricardo.
So let me start by asking you, uh, how
were you influenced by the work of Steven J.
Gould? And I mean, what aspects of his work
influenced you the most?
Well, I was very much influenced, uh, as a,
as a boy, I was very interested in science
and evolution. And, uh, my father was also interested
in these topics, and we subscribed to a magazine
called Natural History Magazine, for which Stephen Jay Gould
wrote a column every month. And his columns were
extremely well written, and they were about matters of,
of evolution. And many of his, uh, his famous
scientific ideas were discussed in these, these columns. So
I, I grew up reading his ideas about the
evolutionary process. Then I had the great fortune to
take a class with him at university in my,
my first year at college where he basically talked
about the same things as he did in his
columns. The, the course was rather humbly titled The
History of Earth and of Life. And it was
just about his ideas of Of the evolutionary process
and so on. And so, in my formative years,
I, uh, I, I learned a lot about him.
As for which particular ideas, um, I mean, it's
hard to pick them out. His worldview about the,
uh, importance of contingency and chance, about, uh, the,
the importance of processes other than natural selection, guiding
evolution, and so on. It was, it was his
whole worldview that, uh, that I learned as I
grew up. Now, I'm not saying that I subscribed
to everything that he, uh, believed in, but it
certainly had a great influence.
Sure, and and what were his main ideas about
evolution?
Well, he had a number of ideas. Uh, HE'S
probably most famous for the theory called punctuated equilibrium,
the idea that for long periods of time, a
species would remain basically unchanged, and then it would
change to a great deal over a short period
of time, uh, perhaps linked with the process of
turning into a new species. Uh, SO that, that
was probably his most famous idea, but he also
argued that we can't, uh, we, we can't interpret
every feature we see in an organism as an
adaptation, something sculpted by natural selection, that there are
other processes that also can lead to evolutionary change.
And he also argued that uh that all of
evolution did not occur occur at the level of
selection on populations. Sometimes, well, for example, he might
say, why are there so many species of rodents,
several 1000 so few of monotrenes, the platypus and
the echidna, and that might not have anything to
do with rodents being more adaptable. It might be
something. Some other factor that just uh caused them
to speciate more frequently. So those, those were a
number of, of his uh scientific ideas.
And apart from natural selection, which other mechanisms play
a role in evolution?
Well, the other mechanisms that play a role are
things like gene flow, the exchange of genes between
populations, um, mutations, the extent to which mutations occur
in more in some ways than others. Uh, INBREEDING
between populations, and I am blanking on one. There
is one more that I is just not popping
into my head. Well, it'll come back to me.
And then, of course, as the point I made
a moment ago, in addition, evolution occurs not just
due to the processes that work within a population,
but in addition, uh, they work at selection at
other levels, at selection favoring some types of species
over others, as I just mentioned a moment ago.
The last process is genetic drift, uh, which is
an important one for Gould, that random changes that
occur just for no selective reason. Most frequent in
small populations.
Uh, WHAT about the role of chance events like
for example, the asteroid that led to the extinction
of the dinosaurs and the leather rise of the
mammals?
Well, that was an important idea that gold championed
that. That stuff happens, basically, that could change the,
uh, the direction of evolution, like the asteroid that
that hit Earth 66 million years ago, that essentially
wiped out the dinosaurs, except for the birds, and
a lot of other creatures, and gave mammals their
real chance to flourish. And that was just A
a happenstance. What if that asteroid had zoomed right
past the planet without hitting Earth? We would be
in a very different place today. So yes, Gould
argued that what he called contingent events, unpredictable, not,
uh, yeah, not unpredictable contingent events could radically change
the shape of evolution.
Uh, WHAT is convergent evolution and does it go
in any way against frameworks like rules based more
on unpredictability and non-repeatability?
Well, convergent evolution is the phenomenon that occurs when
two species independently evolve the same features and uh
Oftentimes it is the result of species adapting to
the same environment in the same way. They are
experiencing the same natural selection pressures, and they evolve
the same adaptation. So often it is taken as
evidence of adaptive evolution. Uh, SOME people have argued
that that. Convergent evolution is very common in the
natural world and that it goes against Gould's argument
of the importance of, of happenstance and the unpredictability,
the unpredictability of evolution, because it indicates that in
fact, the same thing does happen repeatedly and that
in some sense one could predict if convergent evolution
is common, that a population experience of a particular
environment will evolve in a particular way.
And how do we study the mechanisms behind evolution,
like, as we mentioned earlier, natural selection, but also
genetic flow, genetic drift, and so on.
Uh, WELL, there's two main approaches. One is to
actually study populations and measure what's going on, measure
whether natural selection is occurring or measure the extent
of gene flow between populations. And one of the
things that we have realized as evolutionary biologists in
the last few decades is that evolution uh can
occur very rapidly. This is something that Charles Darwin.
Thought did not happen and uh it's amazing Darwin
was right about so many things for which there
was no evidence in his day. He just figured
it out, but this is one thing he, he
got wrong, and that is he thought that evolution
proceeded extremely slowly, so slowly that it would take
thousands of years to see any sign of it.
And for that reason, Darwin never even proposed that
you could try to, to study it as it
occurred because it would take too long. But we
now know that's wrong, that when natural selection pressures
are strong, when the environment changes or uh population
experiences a different environment, they can adapt very quickly.
And what that means is that we can actually
observe evolution as it happens over, over, not just
a human lifespan, sometimes a couple of years. Uh,
SO that is one approach to the, the study
of evolution is studying it in the here and
now, see what's happening. The other approach is to
look at the fossil record and see the changes
that have occurred over the eons and try to
figure out the processes that um That led to
those changes. And so to some extent in the
here and now we can study the process and
with the fossil record we can see the pattern
and the real challenge is to connect the two,
to take what we know about what goes on
in short periods, and can we extrapolate or somehow
apply that to understand what's gone over long periods
of time.
When we want to understand the evolutionary origins of
any particular kind of trait, where should we start
from?
Well, Probably. Uh, THE first place to look at
is the fossil record, to see if we can
see the record by which that trait has evolved,
when it occurred, in what species, how often it
occurred, and to get the, the historical record. Then
if it's possible to study how that trait is
functioning today, is natural selection favoring it? Is it
still changing? In a few cases, you can actually
do experiments to, to try to simulate the evolutionary
origin of that trait, uh, and to try to
understand the processes that may have under underlain that
evolution.
And what do you think of adaptationist approaches to
evolutionary biology? I mean, since not all traits are
adaptations.
That's a, that's a great question, and that's a,
a topic that has been debated for decades. That's
certainly what Gould, uh, one of the strong points
that Gould made was arguing against the primacy of
adaptationism as the explanation for uh evolutionary patterns. Uh,
I have. I have mixed feelings on this. On
the one hand, I think it's no doubt that
natural selection is the strongest evolutionary force. And so
it is reasonable to ask when you see some
feature, particularly an odd feature, to try to figure
out How could natural selection have favored that? How
could the evolution of this trait actually be beneficial
to organisms? At the other hand, however, we need
to recognize that adaptation and natural selection aren't the
only processes, and there, there are other reasons that
a trait might evolve and particularly along those lines.
It's important to remember that for natural selection to
happen and to lead to evolutionary change, you need
variation in a population. If all individuals had brown
eyes, then, uh, evolution couldn't occur because there's no
variation to, uh, for natural selection to favor. So
not until a mutation occurs and someone has blue
eyes or green eyes. Once there's variation, then Evolution
can occur, and the reason I emphasize this is
that the production of variation is as important as
what natural selection does with it. If certain types
of variation are more likely to occur in a
population due to mutations or whatever, the map may
bias evolution in certain directions, or conversely, if variation
for a trait never appears, then it can't evolve.
For example, People have studied, tried to select individuals
that are asymmetric on the left side or the
right side of their body that, uh, they've done
this a lot in fruit flies and in other
organisms. Try to pick individuals that, um, have longer
left legs than are bigger left wing, bigger wings
on the left side of their body than the
right side of their body. You just can't do
it. And the reason is there is no gene.
Through wings on the left side, there are just
genes that affect the size of wings in general,
both left side and right side. So there's no,
no genetic variation that can be favored to cause
left-winged fruit flies. Now you can get fruit flies
that are more variable, but it's balanced. It's either
left or right side. So, uh, the point is
that the production of variation and the mechanisms underlying
that can guide evolution. As much as natural selection,
or at least both of these processes are important,
and the production of variation is something that isn't
necessarily regulated by natural selection. The, so, adaptation, in
other words, is limited by the, the variation that
can be produced.
So in studying evolution and gathering more evidence to
support it and also understanding how it works, how
it plays out. Tell us about experimental evolutionary science.
What is it and how is it done?
Well, um, When natural selection was first proposed as
the mechanism of evolution by Darwin, excuse me. Um,
THE idea didn't actually catch hold right away, that
Darwin convinced much of the learned world that evolution
had occurred, but they were, the world was much
less convinced that natural selection was the mechanism. And
it wasn't until the early 1900s, about a century
ago, that the field of genetics took off and
people came to understand that natural selection was a
powerful force and a lot of The evidence supporting
this came from experiments in the laboratory on organisms
like fruit flies where you could take a population
of fruit flies and measure the size of their
wings and only keep the ones with the biggest
wings and breed them with each other and again
in the next generation pick the ones with the
biggest wings or the most spots on their side
or any other trait and almost invariably. That population
would evolve the trait being favored. Excuse me. And
so that laboratory proof that, that is experimental evolution
and such research has continued for a century, and
it's basically shown that you can select on almost
any trait in a laboratory population and get an
evolutionary response. Not every trait. I've always already talked
about when you can't get a response, but almost
every trait, showing the power of natural selection. Well,
in recent years, people have taken this approach into
the field and studied organisms in a natural context
to measure natural selection and see if evolution occurs
as a result of it. And so that's an
area that's really taking off and is showing that
what we've learned in the lab pretty much transfers
to the field as well.
So in your book you talk about experiments done
with, for example, fruit flies, bacteria, foxes, field mice.
Could you tell us about at least one or
two of these examples and experiments that can be
run and have been run on them?
Sure. Well, the first experiment that really got attention
was one done on guppies on the island of
Trinidad, done, that work was now 40, done 40
years ago. It was uh initiated by John Eler,
uh, an evolutionary biologist now in Australia. And basically,
he was aware of previous work on these guppies.
So guppies, as most people know, are these colorful
fish that you see in pet stores, and many
people, hobbyists keep them. And, but few people know
where they live, and where they live is in
the mountainous streams of Trinidad and Northern South America.
And in those streams, there's an interesting pattern that
in Lower parts of the streams, the, the fish
are quite bland in coloration, but higher up in
the stream, higher in the mountains, the fish are
quite colorful. And it turns out that this pattern
is associated with the presence of larger predatory fish.
And so the idea that had been proposed was
that uh that female guppies prefer to mate with
males that are very colorful. We don't know why.
It's certainly true, we now know, and that, but
still, still trying to figure out why, but they
do. And so in areas high in the mountains
where there are no predators, the flashiest, most colorful
guppy male gets the most matings and passes on
its genes. However, lower down in the stream where
the predators occur, the males are too conspicuous, and
the, the predators pick them off. And so even
if females prefer gaudy colored males, they don't last
long enough, and so natural selection favors a more
camouflaged color. Well, that's a, a reasonable hypothesis, but
as we always say in, in many aspects of
science, correlation does not prove causation. That's what experiments
are for. ACTUALLY test whether the the process we
presume causes the correlation actually does. And so that
is what Endler did. He took some guppies from
a pool where there were predators and they were
bland guppies, and he just moved them slightly up
the stream past a waterfall that the predators couldn't
get, get past. So, and in fact, this pool
was empty. So we put these bland guppies in
the empty pool, no predators. And just watched them.
And very quickly, after just a few, uh, a
few years, the males have evolved to become quite
colorful, just as predicted. And that experiment was then,
uh, repeated in other, in other pools in Trinidad,
also in laboratory greenhouses and, in little swimming pools,
and the results are very consistent. And they demonstrated
that predation is the selective pressure affecting color. AND
guppies. And so that was a brilliant experimental program.
I should say it's continued to this day, led,
uh, particularly by David Resnick at University of California
Riverside looking at many other features of the guppies
and how predation affects its evolution. So that, that's,
uh, that's probably the first really high profile experimental
work in evolution. Experimental work on evolution in nature.
Um, MY own work with colleagues at the University
of California, Davis, and, and elsewhere on the length
of lizard legs. It was uh similar in scope.
What we did is we worked in the Bahamas
where a very common lizard that I've spent my
life studying the brown aolus lizard, occurs, and the
brown onol occurs almost everywhere, even on tiny little
islands. And I mean, islands that are the size
of, uh, a pitcher's mound, well, small islands, that's
the size of the infield on a baseball diamond
or size of a basketball court, say. And you
can find these little brown and holes. And this
work was done in the Bahamas and on many
of the larger islands. There's a larger lizard that
occurs only on the ground that uh that eats
smaller lizards. It's called the curly tailed lizard. Excuse
excuse me. Now, one more thing I need to
tell you, two more things I need to tell
you. Um, THESE types of lizards, I spent my
career studying. There are 400 species of them throughout
the Caribbean islands, Central and South America, very diverse
group. And one feature that varies among different species
is how long their legs are. And moreover, there
is a relationship between how long their their legs
are and the size of the. Of the branches
they use because they're mostly up in the trees,
though some come down to the ground. The lizards
that occur on broad surfaces have long hind limbs.
Ones that use narrow surfaces have short hind limbs,
and we actually know functionally why that may be
that on a broad surface, like a big tree
trunk, the longer your legs are, the faster you
can run because you can take longer strides. But
on narrow surfaces, long legs are a disadvantage because
it's hard to to grab the surface, and actually
shorter legs are more efficient. And so, for various
reasons, it seemed that leg length in these lizards
was an adaptation to using different surfaces. But again,
as I mentioned a moment ago, correlation does not
prove causation. The ideal thing to do is to
do an experiment that make lizards use different surfaces
and see if they adapt. And so what we
did is we took these tiny islands that had
the brown annoles that had long legs, no, I'm
sorry, um, I need to tell you one other
thing. We, we found some islands that had no
anols at all, small islands. That we're empty of
the holes. We now know the reason, and that
is hurricanes come through every, every now and then,
and because the islands are, are low lying, they
just wipe everything off. But then, if the lizards
get there, which they do naturally colonize islands, they
can establish a population and, and persist till the
next hurricane. So what we did is we used
these little islands as little test tubes, and we
basically took the brown and owles and established them
on these small populations. And I want to be
clear here, the brown and Oles are native to
this area that we took lizards that occurred 100
yards away on a bigger island. And so we're
just sim simulating the natural process of colonization, which
we've seen occur naturally. So we put the lizards
on the islands. And then we um. We introduced
the curly tail lizard, also native to the area,
also on the next island over to half the
islands, uh, deciding randomly which which islands got curly
tail lizards and which ones didn't. And the reason
we did that is that we expected that the
brown and Os would use the ground a lot.
In the absence of curly tail lizards, but when
we introduced these predators, which basically only use the
ground, the lizards would move up into the bushes
to get away from them. And moving up in
the bushes, they would have to use the narrow
surfaces, because these were islands that didn't have very
thick vegetation. And so the predators were a way
of, of causing the lizards to change their habitat
use. And the question is, once they're up in
the, in the, in the bushes, using the narrow
surfaces, would they evolve shorter legs? And the answer
is yes, they did. We measured, we could measure
uh natural selection. It was quite strong on limb
length, and over, uh relatively short periods of time,
lizards did evolve shorter legs to use the narrow
surfaces. So those are 22 of the first studies
that, that tested evolutionary hypotheses experimentally in the field.
Now that this approach has become much more common,
and many people are, are looking at a wide
variety of organisms in many different contexts to, to
ask these sort of questions.
That's really fascinating. And what brings about variation in
evolution? Is it simply mutation or are there other
factors?
Well, mutation is the ultimate source of variation, and
we know that it occurs, although any given mutation
occurring in any individual is very uncommon, but given
enough enough individuals in a population in enough years,
mutations occur all the time. And so that is
the. The ultimate source of variation, but another process
I mentioned earlier is genetic exchange among populations that,
uh, a mutation may occur in one population and
then subsequently an individual from that population migrates to
another uh another population bringing that, uh, variation with
it. So gene flow in a more, uh. In
the moment is a much more potent force of
variation than mutation, but mutation is where the, the
variation comes from, uh, eventually or initially.
Right. What factors play a role in speciation and
the diversification of species?
Well, this is a topic that has long been
controversial, and the more we learn, uh, we learn
more, but there's still a lot of debate. But
I would say the two main processes, and the
question is. How important each one is. First is
isolation. Two populations that do not exchange genes, uh,
they can diverge for many reasons, so that eventually
they become different species. And by different species, I
refer to the classic definition of a species being
two populations that cannot successfully interbreed. And so the
more populations. Just evolve differently, the more likely they
are to evolve differences that keep them from interbreeding.
Now, the other factor is natural selection, that we
know that populations that adapt to different environments or
adapt in different ways may uh evolve again so
they can't interbreed, not because they're evolving necessarily for
that reason, but just a consequence of different adaptations.
So those are the two main factors. The real
debate that occurs is, do you, do you need
isolation? If, if, if natural selection is favoring two
different types in the same population, can they evolve
into different species without being isolated? Or will the
genetic exchange between them prevent them from diverging? And
that's a topic that has been controversial for half
a half a century, and, and the debate still
continues.
I understand. Uh, AND how fast can evolutionary change
occur? Do we really need, I don't know, thousands
of years, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of
years for evolutionary change to occur?
Well, no, certainly not for adaptive change. We've, we've
seen that that can occur in years. Uh, DEPENDS
on the generation, length of the organism. It will
be faster in fruit flies and elephants then, but
evolution can occur very rapidly. Speciation, of one species
turning into another or one species splitting into two
species. Takes longer. Uh, OCCASIONALLY it can occur pretty
quickly, but in most cases, it's a longer process.
How predictable is evolution? I mean, is to what
extent can we predict evolution?
That is another controversial question. You are full of
controversial questions of. It depends in part on the
scale of what you're asking. If uh, if you
put a, well, I, I, as I've told you,
experiments in, in the laboratory with fruit flies or
or other organisms, if you select. On some trait
You can usually get a change in that trait
and usually. One you could predict, uh, if you
select for larger wings, larger wings will evolve. Now,
if you, if you try to I say how
the larger wings will evolve, that can be less
predictable is it that they evolve, uh. Well, you
would have to talk about the structure of the
wing, but there are different ways that a wing
can be large. And can you predict, if you
just predict, if you just select on larger wings,
can you predict how the larger wings will be
constructed? Maybe not so much. So, um, So the
less, there, there's a lot of wiggle room and
even in the short term of the details of
how evolution occurs, and over longer periods or more
substantial changes, evolute, this is the argument that Gould
and people like him would argue, no, you can't
predict it, unexpected things will happen, asteroids will hit.
A major mutation you couldn't predict will occur that
will send evolution in a different direction. Other people
argue that no, there are best solutions to problems
posed by the environment and that populations will find
those best solutions. They would argue there might be
a best way to build a large fruit fly
wing, and populations will evolve that best way. And
this is a, this is the debate between Gould
and his detractors.
Mhm. Are the life forms we find on earth
mostly inevitabilities, or are they mostly evolutionary flukes?
Well, that, I mean that gets to the heart
of the question that Gould was famous in his,
uh, his fabulous book that laid out his ideas.
There's a book for the general public that I
highly recommend to everyone called Wonderful Life. Uh, HE
said something to the effect of, uh, if we
could rewind the tape of life. This is a
metaphor that increasingly as tapes no longer exist, no
one understands it. But if you could go back
in time and start again, Would you get the
same outcome? And in particular he says would humans
have evolved? And his answer was absolutely not. All
kinds of random things happen asteroids and ice ages
and, well, just random things that could send evolution
in a different direction. And so the particular path
that evolution occurred. It is unpredictable. Now, there are
other people influenced by the ubiquity of convergent evolution
who take the opposite view. They, they argue that
That there are best solutions that natural selection drives
for, and the human form is one of those,
those uh, those best solutions. And so they argued
that the evolution, perhaps not of humans exactly like
us, but of human-like organisms was inevitable. And in
fact, there is a, uh, a, a very fun
example of this that someone has has suggested a
guy named uh Simon Conway Morris, a very prominent
paleontologist from England, uh, A different paleontologist years ago
pointed out that through time, life brain size tended
to increase. If you just looked at the brains
of the first vertebrates 500 million years ago and
just plotted brain size through time, there has been
an increase. And this was true. Even in the
age of dinosaurs, as dinosaurs evolved from their origin
240 million years ago till they disappeared, the brain
size got bigger, and it turns out that this
paleontologist discovered a type of dinosaur very similar to
Velociraptor, the famous raptor from the Jurassic Park movies
that have the largest brain relative to body size.
Of any dinosaur that existed, it occurred right before
the asteroid hit. And if you think about Velociraptor
and its relatives, here's an animal that walked on
two hind legs. It had grasping hands. Remember in
the first Jurassic Park movie, it, it turns the
doorknob up and had a big brain with eyes
forward, kind of like us. And so what this
paleontologist had suggested was that dinosaurs were on the
way to producing a humanoid type, very intelligent organism.
And he even sketched out how that evolution might
have proceeded. Very fanciful. I mean a fun idea.
Well, Simon Conway Morris has cited this as evidence
that if the asteroid had not hit Earth, the
mammals would not have flourished. Us human mammal humans
would not have evolved. But something like us would
have evolved from dinosaurs, and so he was arguing
that. The evolution of a human-like organism was inevitable.
Uh, SO that's the debate. Gould would have said,
nope, we're just a lucky fluke, and if things
had happened differently, if that asteroid hadn't hit Earth,
humans are nothing like us would ever have appeared.
Simon Morris argues we're inevitable. Now, I think that
um most people would lean more to Gould's side
on this than Conway Morris's, but not every, everyone,
and Many people would be in the middle on
this debate. I haven't even answered your question yet,
and that question is, what about life on other
planets? You know, I think that's what you were
asking. Um, WERE you asking that? Should I address
that question?
Uh, I, I mean, before we get to that,
because I also have that question here to ask
you, let me just ask a more, uh, another
kind of question. So, uh, I mean this is
something that you mentioned related to Gould's work, but.
Then if we replayed life's tape again, should we
expect the same results or not?
Well, it depends on how uh deterministic. So, Gould
would say no, Conway Morris would say yes, uh,
to some extent, you could argue, if we Went
back in time and everything were exactly the same
well then it would have played out. The same
way that because everything would occur exactly the same
way. Uh, YOU know, the raindrops would have fallen
in the same way, the comets would have hit
the planet or not, and so on, the asteroids,
uh. And there's a long philosophical debate on this
topic. There are some people who would argue that
there is truly indeterminacy in life, that at the
quantum mechanic level, how, you know, where an electron
is and so on is indeterminate. So that if
you went back in time and started up again,
that source of indeterminacy might lead the events that
occur through time to be different. And so, the
possibility that something different could happen does exist, that
the asteroid would miss Earth instead of hitting, or
other events would be at least subtly different. So
that suggests that there is a scope because If,
if, if the events were deterministic, then of course
life would have to follow the same path if
every atom was in the same place. But if
that's not the case, there is the possibility for
evolution taking different courses, and Gould would argue that
it would. Conway Morris would argue, no, that wouldn't
matter because natural selection, the, the favored, uh, types
would remain the same. The, the favored solutions to
the problems posed by the environment.
And is it possible for us to ever be
certain of the correct answer there?
Well, Yes and no. The, the interesting thing about
this is Gould's, Gould idea, let's go back in
time, replay the tape. He then said, but of
course, that's impossible. This is just a gedanken experiment,
a German word. This is just a thought experiment.
But in fact, people have come up with two
ways of testing Gould's idea. One is to look
at convergent evolution, at the fossil record and consider
the evolution that and consider uh different species experiencing
the same environment to sort of be like replaying
the tape. If they're experiencing the same environment, do
they evolve in the same way? That's one way,
of course, it's a little indirect. The other way
is some fabulous laboratory evolution experiments where people have
taken uh populations of microbes such as E. COLI
and taken genetically identical populations and split them into
multiple subpopulations, so they start out completely identical. And
then you put them in a new environment, not
when they're adapted to. And you ask, do these
identical, these initially identical populations experiencing the same environment,
absolutely the same, as much as we can control
it in a lab environment, do they evolve in
the same way? And uh one of the greatest
experiments in the history of science was the first
to do this. It was a project by a
researcher named Richard Lensky at Michigan State University and
many colleagues. Well, they did exactly what I described,
and what's fabulous about this experiment is it has
continued now for more than 30 years. Yes, more
than 30 years, and so they have been able
to follow evolution in these microbes for, I think,
now over 80,000 generations, for 12 populations. Again, they
started all identical. They've been exposed to the same
environment, but they've evolved independently, and the results have
been spectacular. What they've found is That as a
generality they have evolved in the same way in
many respects, but in a few key ways they
have not, and there have been one particular major
adaptation that evolved in only one of the 12
populations. It evolved at about 30,000 generations and in
the subsequent 50,000 more generations, none of the other
11 populations have evolved this adaptation, showing that. Even
in as constant situations could be created in the
environment, something different happened in one population, something major
different. So, those are such experiments are the closest
we can get to actually testing the idea of
replaying the tape.
Right. So let us delve into the question of
life on other planets, then, which will be my
last question. Uh, SO can all of these tell
us anything about life on other planets and what,
what it might look like?
Well, this is, this is a, a fun question.
Uh, IF you look at science fiction movies, um,
Star Wars, Star Trek, whatever, uh, uh, uh, the,
the Pandora, was those movies, uh, Avatar, those movies.
You know, the, the life on other planets is
remarkably similar as it's portrayed, uh, in these movies
to life on Earth. Uh, YOU know, a little
bit different, maybe an extra eye in the forehead
or maybe only 3 fingers, but they're basically humans
and other animals we're familiar with. I, I thought
that was, uh, really funny in the first Avatar
movie. They were just Either living organisms or extinct
ones, you know, but with an extra pair of
legs or something else, but they were completely recognizable
life forms. And I think that the uh underlying
idea is that, well, life will evolve in the
same way on other planets. I think that's ridiculous.
Um, FOR one thing, You know, even though we
now understand that there are many planets around other
stars in the universe, even in our galaxy, that
are somewhat similar to Earth, they're not identical to
Earth. They're undoubtedly different in all kinds of ways.
And so the likelihood that they would, uh, that
the natural selection, if it operated, would occur in
the same way, is very low because the actual
environments would be different. And um, There's no telling
that natural selection would work, that natural selection works,
causes evolution because of the particular way that, that
traits are inherited due to DNA in On earth,
but DNA, there could be other ways of inheritance.
There could be multiple sexes. Oh, you know, I
know this is a controversial topic, but there could
be Multiple sexes that all have to unite to
reproduce more than, more than the sperm and the
egg. There could be all kinds of different uh
ways that that evolution occurs that would shape it
in different ways. And frankly, I think that much
of the research, when we go to Mars or
whatever to try to detect life. Uh, IT'S detecting
life by signs that indicate life on Earth, and
I think there's a little bit of a lack
of imagination in And uh In failing to, to,
to investigate whether life could be based on something
other than carbon atoms or take different forms. And
if that were the case, Life might be radically
different. Uh, I like the minority of science fiction
films in which. Life on other planets is, you
know, completely unlike life on, on our planet. And
um, I think, personally, I think that's much more
likely. And there are some people who are researching
this sort of idea. The the problem is If
life has occurred in some different way, we may
not even be able to recognize it. We might
not know what to look for and may not
recognize it when we see it. So my guess
is that life on other planets will not be
very familiar to us at all for a number
of reasons.
Great. So the book is again Improbable Destinies Fate,
Chance, and the Future of Evolution, and I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview and Dr. Losses, just before we go apart
from the book, where can people find your work
on the internet?
Well, um, I have a website that has copies
of lots of my papers. Last name is L
O S O S. AND it's an unusual last
name, so it's not that hard to Google me.
That's probably the best way or go to Google
Scholar or just, uh, you know, Google my name
and, and a lot of my research will come
up.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
Yes, it's been wonderful. Thanks so much for the
invitation.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andrerancis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun Macha
Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark
Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan Wilson,
asilla dearraujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punteran
Rosmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky,
Scott Zachary Fitim Dayani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris
Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists,
Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey,
then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas
radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry,
Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas
Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate
van Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim,
Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic
Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo
Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.